• California's minimum wage is currently $16 per SUMMARY OF LEGISLATIVE ANALYST'S ESTIMATE
hour. This measure increases that minimum, as OF NET STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT FISCAL
follows:
IMPACT:
• Employers with 26 or more employees would
pay $17 hourly for the remainder of 2024 • State and local government costs could
and $18 hourly beginning on January 1, increase or decrease. This change likely would
2025. not exceed the high hundreds of millions of
dollars annually.
• Employers with 25 or fewer employees would
pay $17 hourly beginning January 1, 2025, • State and local tax revenues likely would
and $18 hourly beginning January 1, 2026. decrease. This revenue loss likely would not
exceed a few hundred million dollars annually.
• Thereafter, as existing law provides, the
minimum wage annually adjusts for inflation.
• In addition to the generally applicable minimum
wage described above, current laws establish
a higher minimum wage in specified industries.
This measure does not amend those laws.

BACKGROUND PROPOSAL
State and Local Laws Set Minimum Wages. Higher Minimum Wage in 2025. In 2025,
Employers must pay their workers at least the California would have different minimum wages
minimum wage. California's minimum wage for employers of different sizes. Employers with
currently is $16 per hour. Some local governments 26 or more employees would have a minimum
have higher minimum wages. Minimum wage wage of $18 per hour. Employers with 25 or
laws do not apply to independent contractors and fewer employees would have a minimum wage
other self-employed people. of $17 per hour. Without Proposition 32, the
Inflation Adjustments Under Current Law. Prices minimum wage for all employees would be about
tend to go up over time. These rising prices are $16.50 per hour. The proposition would not
called "inflation." The state adjusts its minimum change any local or industry-specific minimum
wage every year based on inflation. Each wages.
adjustment matches U.S. inflation, except in Minimum Wage $18 Per Hour in 2026. In 2026,
two cases: the minimum wage would be $18 per hour for all
• If inflation is negative, the adjustment is zero. employees. Without Proposition 32, it likely would
be about $17 per hour.
• If inflation exceeds 3.5 percent, the
adjustment is 3.5 percent. Inflation Adjustments Paused Until 2027. The
minimum wage would be adjusted for inflation
State Sets Higher Minimum Wages for Some every year starting in 2027. These adjustments
Employers. State laws set higher minimum wages would follow the current rules described earlier.
for employers in some industries. For example,
most fast food restaurants must pay their workers
at least $20 per hour.

FISCAL EFFECTS services programs (such as California's
Medicaid program, Medi-Cal) because it
Fiscal Effects Depend on Economic Effects. would change people's incomes. These
Proposition 32 could have a wide range of enrollment changes likely would reduce state
economic effects: and local government costs.
• Higher Wages. Workers who would have Combining these two pieces, total state and local
made less than $18 per hour would instead government costs could go up or down. This
make $18 or more per hour by 2026. Higher change likely would not exceed the high hundreds
minimum wages also tend to push up wages of millions of dollars each year (annually). (Total
for other workers. This means that many state and local government spending in California
workers making a bit more than $18 per hour exceeds $500 billion annually.)
also likely would get a raise. The change in costs to the state's General Fund
• Likely Higher Prices. Higher wages would likely would be less than one-half of 1 percent
increase costs for many businesses. Some of the state's total General Fund budget. (The
businesses likely would charge customers General Fund is the account the state uses to pay
higher prices. The overall price increase from for most public services, including education,
Proposition 32 likely would be smaller than health care, and prisons.)
one-half of 1 percent. Lower Revenues. Proposition 32 would affect
• Likely Lower Profits. The costs of higher income tax and sales tax revenues because it
wages likely would reduce some businesses' would change incomes and prices. Overall, the
profits. proposition likely would reduce state and local
• Effect on Jobs. The number of jobs in the government revenues. Revenues would be lower
state could go up or down. This change mainly due to lower incomes for business owners.
The net revenue loss likely would not exceed a
likely would be smaller than one-quarter of 1
percent. few hundred million dollars annually. Last year,
total state and local revenue from these taxes was
Government Costs Could Go Up or Down. about $200 billion.
Proposition 32 would increase state and local
government costs in some ways but would Visit sos.ca.gov/campaign-lobbying/cal-access-
decrease them in other ways: resources/measure-contributions/2024-
• Higher Government Costs to Pay for ballot-measure-contribution-totals for a list
Workers. The state and many local of committees primarily formed to support or
governments would have higher costs to pay oppose this measure.
their employees. They also would have higher
costs to pay for work done by workers who Visit fppc.ca.gov/transparency/
are not their employees. top-contributors.html
• Savings From Lower Enrollment in to access the committee's top 10 contributors.
Health and Human Services Programs.
Proposition 32 would change the number
of people enrolled in health and human
PROPOSITION RAISES MINIMUM WAGE.
32 INITIATIVE STATUTE.
* ARGUMENT IN FAVOR OF PROPOSITION 32 *
Every Californian who works at least a full-time, 40-hour By raising the minimum wage to $18 per hour,
work week should be able to afford life's basic needs. Proposition 32 will bring a much-needed raise to 2 million
However, there are about 2 million Californians who are California workers and create a more prosperous system
working full time, and more, but earn less than $18 per where big corporations aren't allowed to exploit smaller
hour. Most of these Californians who earn less than $18 businesses, our communities, and our hardest working
per hour are heads of their households. Most of these neighbors.
Californians who earn less than $18 per hour have kids. Finally, when more Californians earn a fair wage for their
We can all agree that Californians who work hard, working work, our entire economy does better. Working people
full time or more, should not live in poverty. But that's are better able to afford their rent, provide three meals
exactly how millions of Californians are living because per day for their kids, and all of that spending boosts
their wages are too low to afford how expensive life has the economies of our local communities. That boosted
become in California. spending creates more jobs in our communities, which
makes everyone better off.
In addition, when people who work hard are paid wages
that aren't enough to cover life's basic needs, a bigger It's time that we make California a place that working
burden is put on taxpayers to make up the difference families can afford. By raising the minimum wage to $18,
Proposition 32 will directly better the lives of 2 million
that some corporations aren't honoring. It is wrong for
all the businesses that do right by their workers that
Californians who will get a raise and we will stimulate more
spending in our communities that most need that boost.
some corporations are allowed to pay Californians such That boost will create more jobs and more prosperity
low wages that those workers are left needing taxpayer for everyone.
funded aid. Taxpayers should not be subsidizing some
VOTE YES ON PROP. 32!
corporations that choose to pay extremely low wages
and enabling them to keep the rest as excess profit for Joe Sanberg, Anti-Poverty Advocate
their owners.
* REBUTTAL TO ARGUMENT IN FAVOR OF PROPOSITION 32 *
VOTE NO on PROPOSITION 32! Prop. 32 raises costs for state and local governments
Ballot measures shouldn't be toys for multimillionaires. by BILLIONS, meaning they'll cut vital services and
raise taxes.
ONE PERSON ALONE—A MULTIMILLIONAIRE-IS
BEHIND PROP. 32. Prop. 32 COSTS JOBS, with the greatest impact on teens
and people of color who are trying to get a career started
One person alone wrote Prop. 32, spent millions getting it with entry level jobs. That's why leaders across California
on the ballot, and wrote the argument for Prop. 32. who previously supported minimum wage increases have
SMALL BUSINESS AND WORKING FAMILY ADVOCATES changed course and asked for them to be slowed down.
DON'T WANT PROP. 32 And Prop. 32 worsens California's increasingly complex
Many of California's leading voices for working families patchwork of minimum wage laws, confusing both workers
and small businesses didn't even want Prop. 32 on the and small business owners.
ballot, but this one author had to have it his way. Prop. 32 seems to be an ego project, not a real solution for
Even leading advocates for higher minimum wages urged working Californians.
him to pull Prop. 32 from the ballot. He refused. Get the facts at StopProp32.com.
One person shouldn't try to dictate labor policy for VOTE NO ON PROPOSITION 32!
39 million Californians, with the only qualification that he's Jot Condie, President
rich. No wonder Prop. 32 is so flawed. California Restaurant Association
Prop. 32 forces small businesses to INCREASE PRICES, Jennifer Barrera, President
adding to inflation and raising the cost of living in California Chamber of Commerce
California even more. That hurts working families! Ron Fong, President
California Grocers Association
40 | Arguments Arguments printed on this page are the opinions of the authors and have not been checked for accuracy by any official agency.
RAISES MINIMUM WAGE. PROPOSITION
INITIATIVE STATUTE. 32
* ARGUMENT AGAINST PROPOSITION 32 *
VOTE NO on PROPOSITION 32. small retail shops, farmers, and more, so we're going to
PROPOSITION 32 INCREASES YOUR PERSONAL COSTS; see the same sticker shock everywhere.
MAKES CALIFORNIA'S HUGE BUDGET DEFICIT WORSE; PROPOSITION 32 WILL HURT SMALL, FAMILY-OWNED
PUNISHES SMALL BUSINESSES; COSTS JOBS; AND BUSINESSES
HURTS THE VERY WORKERS IT'S SUPPOSED TO HELP. Proposition 32 imposes the same high minimum wage
PROPOSITION 32 MAKES OUR BUDGET DEFICIT WORSE on small businesses as it does for large corporations.
BY BILLIONS EACH YEAR AND JEOPARDIZES FUNDING Small businesses are more vulnerable to the impact
FOR PUBLIC SAFETY AND EDUCATION of this higher cost and could force these family-owned
California just experienced a $50 billion budget deficit. businesses in our neighborhoods and communities to
Many cities and counties face huge deficits as well. The shut down.
independent fiscal analysis of Prop. 32 in this same ballot PROPOSITION 32 COSTS JOBS
pamphlet says a minimum wage increase will likely cost Raising the minimum wage again sounds like something
state and local governments billions of dollars EACH that would help workers struggling to make ends meet.
YEAR. Who doesn't want workers to get paid more? It makes us
That means two things. You paying higher taxes to make feel good if we think we're helping our fellow Californians
up the difference and cuts to important programs like
K-12 education, public safety, healthcare, and getting But the reality has now been confirmed, raising the
homeless people off the streets. minimum wage, especially when we raise it TOO FAST,
PROPOSITION 32 INCREASES PRICES FOR costs thousands of jobs, and when a worker loses a job,
CALIFORNIANS WHEN WE CAN LEAST AFFORD IT or the company goes out of business, the wage is ZERO
The cost of living in California is too high. Prices are DOLLARS PER HOUR. And this job loss especially impacts
up more than 20% in the last three years for food, gas, our vulnerable populations the most, with young African-
utilities, healthcare, and clothing. Proposition 32 makes American, Latino, and non-college educated workers
it even worse as it will increase costs on family-owned trying to find their first jobs facing the biggest burdens. 32
businesses who can least afford it and force small Get the facts at StopProp32.com, and vote NO ON
employers to increase prices for consumers to absorb PROPOSITION 32!
the higher minimum wage. Looking at the new California Jot Condie, President
fast-food minimum wage law, fast-food prices in California California Restaurant Association
have gone up 7% in six months, the fastest in the nation. Jennifer Barrera, President
Some well-known "value meals" now cost over 40% more California Chamber of Commerce
in California than the rest of the country. Ron Fong, President
Prop. 32 brings these record-setting price increases to California Grocers Association
small restaurants, grocery stores, convenience stores,
* REBUTTAL TO ARGUMENT AGAINST PROPOSITION 32 *
* REBUTTAL TO ARGUMENT AGAINST PROPOSITION 32 *
YES on PROPOSITION 32 means a RAISE for SERVICE, but that's false. Record corporate profit margins are what
ESSENTIAL, AND OTHER WORKERS to help them afford has increased the cost of living. Now, we have to RAISE
life's basic needs. THE MINIMUM WAGE TO HELP SERVICE WORKERS,
YES ON PROPOSITION 32 means a RAISE for SINGLE ESSENTIAL WORKERS, SINGLE MOMS, and other
MOMS to help them afford life's basic needs. WORKING CALIFORNIANS to be able to AFFORD LIFE'S
YES ON PROPOSITION 32 means CLOSING THE GENDER BASIC NEEDS.
PAY GAP for over a million working women. YES on PROP. 32!
The goods and services you buy have become more Learn more at: livingwageact.com
expensive because CORPORATIONS ARE MAKING Ada F. Briceño, Co-President
RECORD PROFITS! CORPORATE PROFIT MARGINS UNITE HERE Local 11
HAVE INCREASED 100% since the year 2000. The STOCK Nanette Barragán, Congresswoman
MARKET has repeatedly made ALL-TIME HIGHS this year. U.S. House of Representatives, California 44th District
CORPORATE LOBBYISTS who will MAKE MORE MONEY Saru Jayaraman, President
BY KEEPING WAGES LOW are trying to convince you that One Fair Wage
raising the minimum wage will increase the cost of living,